See if it works before going over to chat with Jim Earle.
This is March 7, and cloudy outside but bright inside.
I'm chatting with Jim Earle, and I want to start with student experiences.
Briefly, Jim, would you describe your background before you came to A&M?
Where was home, and what did your family do?
Goodness, that's not me barking.
I was born in Jacksonville, Texas in 1932, and my dad was a country town banker, and I went to high school there, and my class was the first class to skip a grade when they put the 12th grade system in, so I only had 11 years of public school, and I sort of floundered around.
I laid out a year before I came to A&M, and then the following year in 1950,
came to A&M.
Why A&M?
What led you here instead of some other school?
I always felt I needed to prove something and I felt A&M was a place where if you could go to A&M and lash it out, you'd prove something.
And it had a good reputation and I felt like having gone through A&M would be a lot easier
to go somewhere else but having gone through A&M you'd have a little bit of an advantage because you had proved that you could put up with A&M.
That means the Corps, the pecking order that we had during those years in the Corps and the academic program was very rigorous and they didn't mind flunking you out at mid-semester, not mid-year, but mid-semester if your grades weren't good they'd send you home.
And we were also at war and it seemed like that was a natural thing to be prepared to go to war.
And I guess that's the main, those are the main reasons I came.
Did you come to visit before enrolling?
Yeah, I came maybe once or twice.
I came to visit a friend of mine who was out at the Annex at the time.
And that was the last year they had the freshman at the Annex, the hazing
Overcrowded to one problem.
The next problem was hazing was a little bit of a difficulty at A&M.
So they separated the freshmen from the upper classroom, moved them out to old Air Force Base, and that was called the annex.
I went out there and the kids were living in barracks, open barracks, about 20 people per barracks, and they had to go out door to a latrine which was enclosed, a bathroom facility.
And I did make one visit down there.
Did not spend a night, I don't think, but I was down there.
and made a day visit.
So maybe I came to A&M twice.
And when you came to enroll, how did you get here?
Did someone bring you?
Did you catch the bus or the train?
I started school in summer school at A&M.
Summer of 1950, my parents broke me down and dropped me off, and I lived that six weeks in Walton Hall.
And it was normal temperature, natural, un-air-conditioned, I'll bet.
Un-air-conditioned.
None of the campuses was air conditioned at that time.
Describe the campus physically when you arrived.
What were the primary buildings and landmarks?
There was a Corps area and that was called the New Area I think at that time.
That was on the south side where the Corps lived.
But the Corps lived all over the campus because the whole school was Corps except for some of the veterans and some of the people who got out of the Corps after two years.
and Walton Hall was a big complex beginning in fall of 1950 where the freshmen were brought and they were still separated.
They closed the annex but they brought them and they lived in the Walton Hall area in the dorm surrounding that and each and every meal time they'd fall in out in the area in front of Walton and march into Sebeza.
Sebeza was a prominent building, academic building was, and there were some old buildings like Miller and Pfeiffer Hall and Puryear Hall and some of those older buildings.
And Ross Hall, they've all been torn down and replaced since.
And it used to be Military Walk, which is very prominent, where you went from Guyon Hall to Cebiza Hall.
And each and every night, I live in an athletic dorm in Hart Hall, and we had marched in to our meals every morning.
And I guess for all the meals except the evening meal, we would march in.
And we'd march down Military Walk past Ross Hall, the military building.
all the way down and we'd eat and then we'd walk back.
The buildings were fairly old.
They had many of them that didn't last very long that were within the next five or six years torn down and replaced.
Sidewalks weren't wide and they weren't good and didn't have enough of them and it was a pretty basic campus.
It was one that sort of reeked with the tradition and the aura of it being semi-important and you looked at buildings and felt like they
should be respected because they sort of looked like important buildings, but they all dated back pretty well to the turn of the century.
The campus sort of had a definite military look to it, but it was not in any way nice like it is now with landscaping and sidewalks.
Freshmen lived over in separate dorms.
Describe a typical
freshman weekday.
In other words, what time did you get up?
What did you do?
What was the routine for the whole day to make this a class day?
Yeah.
Well, my situation was a little bit different than the standard freshman, and I'll sort of try to speak for both sides because I lived in an athletic dorm where at night we had to go do our workouts and that sort of thing, so our evening meal was not a march-in sort of meal.
But the average freshman, as we observed in the Walton Hall, they would fall out and have formation at about seven o'clock and they would fill up an area about the size of two football fields, all of them in their right spot and they'd give their commands and then they'd all fall in and march in as a unit.
In our group, we were integrated with upperclassmen in Hart Hall.
We had seniors all the way down through the freshmen, so we had a pecking order there we had to live with that might be a little bit more severe than what they were living with where they were separated.
So at the same time, we would fall in at the end of the campus up by Guyon Hall.
And then we'd march into Cebiza and then eat and go through all the rigmarole it took to eat there.
And then as soon as we got through, we asked to be excused as a freshman, went back to our rooms and did what we needed to do
prepare for class.
And the kids down at Walton, what they would do is essentially the same, except they all went back to a freshman environment where there were no upperclassmen except just a few every now and then.
And maybe one per, five or six per dorm, let's say, and the rest of them were all freshmen.
And after breakfast, we'd go to class, and all of us back in those days, almost a man had at least 17 hours of classwork
And we took PE and that was required, but we did not get any hours at all for it.
It was zero hours and we could make some extra grade points that way if we did well enough.
And we'd go to class, and going to class sometimes was a little bit of a problem because as a freshman you had to introduce yourself to upperclassmen and a little bit of hazing that went on of a minor nature.
Sometimes it got a little bit beyond that, but mostly of a minor nature.
to turn and just simply go into class.
You'd sometimes get stopped.
And we'd go from one side of the campus to the other.
It was not unusual at all to have one at the north gate, let's say down in the barracks.
You take ROTC down there and then your next class might be in the gymnasium across campus.
I'd walk all the way across and we had not 30 minutes like we do now, but about 10.
And it was a challenge, but it worked out
It's like picking up the Nobel Prize.
No one's ever been late for a Nobel Prize.
Somehow you've managed to get there on time.
So we had to get across campus in that length of time and seldom did it not work out unless someone just held a class too long.
But they were all aware that we had to move it out in a hurry.
And then we'd go back at noontime and fall in with our respective outfits, march into the dining hall at Cebiza, eat and go back to our dorm and usually have a class at
at one o'clock most of us we almost had to have a class all day long and we had classes on Saturday morning as well so we had a five and a half day situation and quite often the ROTC would throw in some surprises for us on Saturday afternoon so we'd have all day filled up on Saturday as well and I guess that had some merit to it but mostly I think it's to keep us off the highways is the reason they did that but at night
Most freshmen had a CQ restriction where they had to be at Trades and at least look like they're studying from 7 till 10 o'clock at night.
And we had to wear a uniform wherever we went, whether it went off campus or wherever, we had to always have that uniform.
We were always in the military pecking order, so we had that class distinction to deal with.
But our days were extremely full.
All right, late in the afternoon, if you had any unscheduled time, what did you and your buddies do for relaxation on a weekday?
On a weekday, I was on the track team.
We worked out until we were really beat out pretty good, and then we'd make it back in time to eat.
At the mess hall, then we'd go back to the dorm and postpone studying as long as we could.
Every once in a while, we'd have to do some of it,
Seemed like pretty well used up during the day, but managed to do enough of all of it for it to work.
But for recreation, if we had some time where we didn't do it at all, I'd say most of it was just goofing around the door.
Once in a while you go to a movie, but that was a lot of trouble.
Have to hitchhike into town and back.
You mentioned the track team.
Who was the track coach then?
Frank G. Anderson.
Just tell me about Colonel Andy.
Colonel Andy.
has a son, Frank G. I don't know if he's a junior or not, but he became an ophthalmologist, an eye doctor, and they looked just almost alike.
Colonel Andy was about five foot six and with top tee and he'd rock back and forth on his heel to the tips of his toes and stand up trying to rise up high enough to be in your face and had a military background, had an outstanding athletic career himself, was on the football coaching staff of
Dan X Bible, even suited up and ran plays when he was a coach down here with Dan X Bible.
And just as salty as he could be, a nice guy, but boy, he was strictly business all the time.
I think he was commandant for a number of years, but he really had a military bearing about him.
And looking back on him now, he was just cute as a bug, really, because he was such a character.
We all loved him and hated him almost at the same time because of what way he would put the heat on you about working out and working hard.
But he was one of those legendary people that was at A&M and there were a number of others somewhat like him that you always remember as being representative of A&M.
Describe those legendary people.
Whether they were your freshman year or any other year, describe as many of those as your recollection can include.
Well, I guess the top guy was the top man at A&M, that's Gil Gilchrist, and he was a guy surrounded a little bit in controversy, perhaps.
They had some problems with the Corps and with how A&M was making certain changes.
He was sort of at the focal point of that, and that was about a year before I came to A&M when a lot of that occurred.
But he too was a legendary person in it.
He was from the State Highway Department, which is one of the best in the nation, and was their top engineer.
I believe I'm saying that right.
and came to A&M as dean.
And it seemed like many of our people that really made A&M were people who had outstanding careers elsewhere and were not really academicians as such.
They were just people who sort of got the calling to come down here and work on A&M and help contribute to it.
And he was one of them.
We had some guys like in the dean of student's office.
We had Wally Penberthy.
And he had a difficult job of trying to balance out what happened in the Corps and keep a lid on hazing and try to be sure that everyone was acting the way they should and the Corps didn't get too extreme in what they did with freshmen and underclassmen.
Tough job to have, but he was there for many years.
We had people who were in important positions academically.
Bolton who was later dean of engineering.
He was head of electrical engineering.
We had guys like O.D.
Butner who were around and... Mr. Langford.
Who?
Mr. Langford.
Ernest Langford was mayor of Colley Station I guess for 25 or 30 years and sort of set the tone for how A&M intermeshed with Colley Station and had no idea whatsoever what the future of A&M.
and College Station would be as none of us did.
Here we're in the fastest growing community in the state and at that time we had trees growing in the middle of the street and we'd drive around them and it was quaint and nice and Brian was a big city and College Station was just a few bedrooms.
But now that's changed quite a bit but he was a true gentleman and a scholar and had all kind of contributions and talents that he brought to his job.
And who else do we have?
Well, think about some of the teachers that you had that made an impression on your life.
Your English teacher.
Yeah, I had an English teacher.
I don't know, this is sort of funny.
I've written over 60 textbooks.
And I had hell getting through freshman English.
And I don't know, really, that really left an impression on me that
I can't understand how that I could be so poor in English and yet have that such a major part of my life, but I do remember that female teacher that I had, and that was really a grind, and I made A's in English in high school, and I came to A&M and just barely make it through.
I guess Ernest Langford was a guy I had as a teacher who
who I admired because he's so different than I am.
He was one of these nice, well-controlled, gentlemanly type people who you could never see walking fast or lifting anything or being energetic or getting nervous about any situation.
Oh, damn, you know, the car, the brakes went off the car and it's going to roll down the hill and get into a wreck or something is developing around Ernest Langford.
That wouldn't dare happen.
He could just stride in like he was Frank Lloyd Wright, you know.
And I'm sure he must have had the same problems that all of us have, worried about termites and mowing the lawn and that sort of thing.
But he seemed to be above it all.
And I've always admired people who could take the high road.
I always felt like I was taking out the garbage while these other guys were sipping mint juleps on the front porch.
Now, what subject did you have from him?
What course?
It was architecture, some structural architecture.
And did he have a nickname you students have?
No, no.
He was always Mr. Lankford.
Really?
What were some of the other legendary teachers you had?
Screamin' Al Nelson.
I didn't ever have Screamin' Al Nelson.
I don't recall very many legendary teachers.
Well, the people that made a difference in your life that taught you something plus or minus.
That is really hard to come up with.
I think all of them made their contribution.
I can't think of anyone who said, boy, I walked in and after two or three sessions I changed my major or I did this or that.
There was none like that.
Let me ask you in a different way.
Are there some faculty members that if they were alive today that you would like to say thank you to them for what they meant to you?
I guess practically all of them would feel that way, except some of those SOBs over in ROTC classes.
But are there some that would be at the top of your list to think?
Oh, I guess Dick Roman was a good one.
Gale Better, who's been gone for years.
I think he ended up at Colorado and Boulder, I believe.
and Mr. Langford and Nicky Hallman.
I always liked Nicky.
Let's see, in just general courses, I didn't have much relationship with general courses.
We just usually went in and sat in class and a teacher did this thing and we got out of there and that's about the end of it.
So it comes back to the architectural
professors that we dealt with and those who had those long labs where you'd be there four or five hours a day every day.
We got pretty well acquainted with them and for the most part they became one of us and we were pretty close and we had real informal relationships.
We never did with Mr. Langford because he was
He was a cut above all that, but it wasn't that we felt odd by him.
It's just that he was one of those guys who just got natural respect.
Now did you start out as an architecture major?
Did you stay with it?
I did.
Where was architecture located then?
Fourth floor of the academic building.
And describe the quarters and about how many faculty?
I doubt they had more than ten people running the whole program in architecture.
At one end of the hall you'd have the juniors and seniors, the other end would, well we had a five-year program.
So we didn't have very many rooms, but as they moved about from room to room, they'd have labs set up where the fifth year would have a lab, the fourth year and fifth year.
They had about five labs that were dedicated pretty much to full-time to those particular classes.
And then the other rooms were sort of held for, rotated among by all.
general courses that were taken in architecture related to the others.
So, and we had a library that was right off the rotunda.
And I swear to this day, I don't know how we kept losing two or three guys here falling off of that rotunda up on the fourth floor.
Because we'd all go to the Coke machine and get a Coke and sit on the railings there.
And you look down and there's 50 feet below your feet walking around.
And we got almost like trapeze artists up or hanging down, I think.
As far as I know, no one ever jumped off or fell off.
What did the other students, did they have a nickname for you, architecture majors?
I don't think so.
Really?
I would assume that the engineers would have kind of teased you all a bit or something or other.
I was just a guess on my part.
Well, they might have, but you know, we were sort of removed them except when we went to their classrooms to take their subjects.
Let's see.
Did you live in Hart Hall all your years?
Four years.
All right.
Did y'all do any pranks over there, play any jokes on anybody down the hallway or anything?
Oh, yeah.
The big deal was I never did care for it very much, but water tricks, you know, filling rooms up full of water or throwing water in somebody's bed while they're asleep, and that seemed to be a popular thing to do.
I don't know why that was such a turn-on, but it
It was and once in a while they'd throw balloons out the window with water in them to faculty members walking past.
It wasn't widespread, it happened several times that I was aware of and that was about the extent of it and I had all kind of goofing around of course but I guess it's the water tricks that was the most commonly used prank.
Now, you're inferring that you were so studious and so ill-behaved that you didn't participate in those tricks?
Because I was so lazy.
I would go and get up and go to someone's room and tippy-toe in at night with a bucket of water when I could just sit there on my bed.
And in those days, we were sleep-deprived.
Tell them the Billy Bless story.
Man, if we had our night out, it would be getting in bed and sleeping.
You know, a lot of people...
I thought the ideal weekend would be go to a movie downtown, hitchhike down there and see a movie and hitchhike out, get back to the campus about 10 o'clock and then go to bed and sleep until about 2 o'clock on Sunday.
Because during the week it just seems like we never had enough sleep.
I mean just meeting class took up all your life if you didn't study at all.
And then there you were, you come in working out for athletics and you eat and it's 6 o'clock and all you've done is just
One, two, three, four all day long with no breaks whatsoever.
And then you try to do your studying, which was never enough.
And they tell you for every hour you take, you ought to study three hours a day.
And I'm assuming that in Hart Hall, you as a freshman had less regimentation, less core malarkey than you'd had if you'd been over in the core dorm area.
maybe certain types of corps malarkey, but when you have upperclassmen living next door to you, and they just come right in.
Oh, okay.
I was living in a suite there, and my side doors opened into Junior's rooms, and there those guys were right there on top of you when you were over there in Walton Hall, the whole dorm was freshmen.
What kinds of duties or tasks did you as a fish have to do for some of the upperclassmen?
Sweep their room out.
What was really awful is about 9 o'clock at night, I said, boy, we sure like to have hamburgers and I think I'd like to have a chocolate malt and MSC is right over there and they're going to close up pretty soon.
Why don't you go over and get those and bring them back?
See, then you got to get all dressed and put all that kind of stuff on it.
You used to tie up and everything.
Then you go over and bring it all back and you wait in line and then you shake hands about 35 or whatever, clasping over there and then here comes this back.
So that went on all the time.
So I guess that was the biggest problem.
There's a little bit of swatting each other with brooms and stuff like that.
That wasn't major.
But yeah, my class of freshmen in Hart Hall, we were living with upperclassmen.
We had a more typical taste of what the upperclassmen pecking order was than the kids over who were isolated.
Just like they were brought in from Annex except they were living on campus and they had a few seniors in charge of the whole outfit.
But they were basically the whole darn full of freshmen.
Who were some of the athlete celebrities that were living in Hart Hall in those days?
Living next door to me was Buddy Shaffer.
He was an all-conference in the football team and an all-savage conference track man.
His roommate was Ralph Ellis, who now is an independent all-man in Dallas, and Buddy Shaffer was a dentist, and he was captain of the swimming team.
What later became my roommate is Billy Bliss.
He held a national low hurdle record as a high school guy and he was an all-conference hurdler.
And let's see, who was he living with?
I forget now.
But anyway, his roommate moved out and moved in with him.
We had a few ramps down, the football ramps.
There was Gerald Notardis, who was Validic Tourneve and him, and captain of the football team.
And let's see, Darryl Hooper didn't live there, but he was an outstanding CE.
graduate academically and an Olympic champion football team.
And let's see, Gerald Littman was an outstanding ME student and all salvage conference football player from El Campo.
Bobby Joe Ragstall.
Bobby Joe Ragstall, who's now with range science, whatever, extension service, was an outstanding track man and a Yale area football player.
What's so unusual about so many of those guys were so doggone good academically.
And I don't know how they did it.
Because they were in ROTC, they were in very demanding athletic programs and were successful doing that and could handle their academics as well.
An average kid today is worried about taking 12 hours and he's just mad as hell if a teacher gives him some homework assignments.
Who was the football coach in that era?
Well, Harry Statler was in transition at that time, and they replaced him with Ray George.
And that's when we had a real good team, real good material.
But when George took over, they just couldn't win.
And they were expected, they were the favorites, I think.
Bob Smith was, you know, the All-American candidate, made All-American.
And George could win, but he was the coach.
Colonel Andy was the track coach.
I think Floyd might have been my basketball coach.
Let's see, Paul Lemming, was he?
Paul Lemming was married, of course, living off campus.
Like Darrell Hooper, they got married right out of high school.
And so he hung around all the time because he liked to march.
He'd come over at 7 in the morning, a bunch of freshmen.
I said, what is this married guy doing over here marching us down to Spisa?
But he'd come over and make us all dress left and dress right and we'd do all that.
We'd march in.
In his defense, he did make a military career.
I knew him because he went to Beaumont High while I was in Orange High.
He was a stallion in that track.
He was fantastic.
Let's see, were there any character, athletic, athlete characters?
We all were.
We were all clowns, I tell you.
At A&M you had to be a clown or you wouldn't survive.
And the people who took themselves seriously were missing the boat because we
We just had to make the most of nothing is what he wanted to.
Tell me the Colonel Andy story about always trying to keep from having to feed y'all.
All that rascal, I'm kidding.
He'd bring us back from a track meet and say, boys, you're on your own.
I said, man, Colonel Andy, we're into Easter.
We've got two days of Easter holidays left, and we went down there and blew all of our Easter holidays for some sort of an invitational track meet at Carpus Christi, and you're going to turn us all out in a
mess halls closed and shut down.
It's too late to go home.
Our time is used up and our holidays are gone.
You're on your own, boys.
I could just be in the mouth.
We went over there to the damn student center over there.
I'm surprised it was open.
They had sort of a dining hall off the main walkway.
We just signed a bill, several of us did, for Colonel Andrew, for the track team.
And we never heard Doc, I guess he paid him.
paid the bills, but I was sort of worried about it, but I said, well, all he can do is come back and try to collect from him.
As a member of the track team, what was your proudest or some of your proudest moments as an athlete?
Oh, I don't have any proud moments.
I never came through like I should have.
I just enjoyed being on the team, and I was a pole vaulter, and I did so-so, but I didn't do anything at the
to brag about.
I was one of those guys.
I could have been a good department head if I'd had the time.
I could have been a good cartoonist if I'd had the time.
I could have been a good teacher if I had the time.
I could have been a much better athlete if I had the time.
My whole life has been split up among too many things.
So going to school in those long architectural labs and, you know, I was trying to be an amateur boxer at the same time.
I was just split out where my
My time on the track team was just one of the has-beens, one of the guys standing around competing but never excelling.
All right, back to class.
What was the expected rules of behavior of an A&M student in class or in the laboratory?
How did you all conduct yourselves in the classroom or in the laboratory?
Rules as such, I know of none.
The only rules I know of, you know, things just happen sort of out of tradition and you sort of do what the people around you do, but as far as having rules laid out for you, they were not.
The only set of rules one time that an attempt was made to put in place was the merit, not the merit system, was it the honor system, where they were worried about students cheating and they wanted
come up with a West Point sort of rule.
If you saw someone cheating, you would report them.
And I think nearly all of us could embrace the concept